mark sisson welcome to health theory
this is round two for us thank you man
for coming back
it's such a pleasure tom it's been a
while it has i was re-watching the first
episode that we did which i had a great
time doing and one of the things we
talked on or touched on that i wish we
had gone deeper was your whole concept
of living awesome and i thought that
would be a good place to pick up i want
to give people something that's that's
really prescriptive i know that you shy
away from judging people uh i'll be in
full judgment mode in terms of i'll make
the assumption that people want
to
they want to be healthy they want to be
pain-free they don't want to be starving
all the time
and anything that moves them towards
that goal makes sense to me anything
that moves away i will be highly
judgmental of uh just because they're
you know putting themselves in a a
position of punishment i had done to
myself for a very long time uh so in
wanting to help them get there so let's
touch on do you have sort of tenants
of an awesome life that you think are
relatively universal
well yeah i mean um the
i guess the basic structure here is um i
want
to extract the greatest amount of
enjoyment fulfillment contentment
pleasure
uh out of every possible moment now look
sometimes that's just you know not going
to be feasible or it's not going to be
possible but but to the extent that you
can do it as much as possible throughout
the day that's what i'm looking for so i
want people to be as you said pain-free
i want people to be able to move around
i want people to be able to enjoy
playing
uh with their friends with their loved
ones with their kids
uh i want people to enjoy every single
bite of food they ever eat
uh you know these are these are the
basic tenets and so my
uh designing of my own life has been
kind of structured around how do i
create these opportunities uh to get
that sense of satisfaction contentment
fulfillment
productivity
can you define fulfillment you've been a
pretty hard pushing um you said at one
point you considered yourself type i
don't know if you still do but as
somebody who has successfully built and
sold a company obviously you're you're
very driven a marathon runner very
driven
what do you think fulfillment actually
is
let me tell you um when i when i
discover what it is i will let you know
uh this is probably the the essence of a
type a personality so when i say i'm
looking for contentment satisfaction
enjoyment those are all sort of
hedonistic
um
aspects of uh like real-time
uh results right and i can
talk to you about enjoying every bite of
food i can talk about the pleasure
uh you know of a great relationship or
sex or
you know even even a good workout
fulfillment however starts to get into
this
uh realm of self-judgment and you open
this with with the concept of judging
and that's one of the areas that i'm
really hardest on myself so i feel
fulfilled uh when i when i feel like
i've i've made a contribution to
someone's life so i've been
an educator for as long as i've been in
business 35 40 years i've been writing
books i've been doing seminars
i've been doing a lot of podcasts and
nothing
ever is more fulfilling to me than when
someone comes up to me out of the blue
and says hey mark i can't believe it's
you you've changed my life that's
fulfillment to me uh and i get that you
know i'm i'm
i guess i'm i'm lucky enough to have
that happen to me uh on on many
occasions throughout my life
uh so that's sort of a short-term
fulfillment the long-term fulfillment
thing as i say it's really kind of a
self-judgment thing like what is it
going to take for me to just say
mark you're done
you know you've you've done it you've
done enough uh do you think you'll ever
feel that way like wouldn't wouldn't
that almost worry you no that's the
point it's like so the fulfillment
is now sort of uh
just a carrot on a stick in front of me
you know for the rest of my life and i
think that's fabulous i mean i'm i'm
chasing that high of fulfillment and as
i said i get it in in brief moments but
but at the end of the day
as with all of this
it comes down to you like are you
able to recognize the accomplishments
are you able to have the gratitude for
what you've done and who you are and and
and everything about your life you know
are you able to con congratulate
yourself for the accomplishments and
forgive
the mistakes that's really the essence
of that sort of fulfillment and and it
is in my mind an ongoing process so as i
said i'm i'm i'm still i think chasing
it and i i agree with you it's like will
it ever will it ever happen i say you
know check that box off probably not
yeah that to me fulfillment is the one
to to really focus on
because
what what i always equate to people so i
get a lot of people that follow me or
whatever because i've had financial
success and my thing is look that that's
the wrong reason to look at my life and
and think there's anything interesting
because the money didn't change how i
felt about myself and so all of the
insecurities or or struggles that i had
i still had
when i had the money and so you know the
question i always ask people is how many
billionaires have to commit suicide
before you realize that money is not the
issue and my thing is fulfillment is
often born out of suffering and it
really feeds into the only notion that i
think is interesting which is how do you
feel about yourself when you're by
yourself so there's nobody hyping you up
there's nobody trying to tear you down
just like
what do you think about yourself what do
you
to your point about accomplishment like
you know have you served somebody else
have you done something rad for other
people and i'll even push it a little
bit farther and say the thing that i
find most fulfilling is when i've helped
somebody in a unique way
that was born of a skill set that i
acquired through doing really hard [__]
and if the things had come too easily to
me i will discount whatever impact they
have on people
if i'm only able to help myself i would
discount it so you know it's this weird
thing like you're talking about of it's
a carrot that's sort of forever in the
distance you might feel it when somebody
comes up and says hey you impacted my
life but then the next day you you want
to live up to that again you want to
keep pushing yourself and it's the
sincere pursuit
of that that i find interesting even
more than
getting something or you know
crossing a finish line or winning a
record or something like that it's just
am i really going after it
i mean that's exactly uh the concept and
it's it's difficult to explain
uh to some people um and and your you
know your uh your notion of crossing a
finish line you know the number of times
that i've won a race or set a record
um and that and the fulfillment lasted
literally 10 minutes you know or a half
an hour and then the mind immediately
goes to okay you did that what's next
so there's a lot of this what's next
thing um again to your point i sold my
company and i think the last time i
cried was when i hung up the phone from
the closing call right which if you if
you've done that it's basically a couple
of lawyers saying are you ready are you
ready okay why are the money
uh and and
you know i
i've been working on it for a long time
i sobbed and then all of a sudden
nothing changed i just had a lot of
money in my bank account but i'm still
the same guy and and it's almost like
now you have to go okay you did that
now what because you got a lot of life
ahead of you and you know then this the
the sort of the questions you ask are
do i need to top that to you know to
keep that carrot out there or can i
pivot somehow laterally and still have
you know the same sense of
accomplishment but it's really
interesting how how you know those i
guess those of us type a's are kind of
always chasing
that high that we might label as
fulfillment so it's um
it's it's it's really quite interesting
that it just comes back to who are you
when you're alone with yourself i love
that
for sure so when you begin to break out
some of the other elements of living the
awesome life and i think about
when i try to back into how did i have
the energy to you know build the last
company or the energy to build this
company and to really see things through
i always want the answer to be just
mindset mindsets hugely important but
diet and exercise have been these like
massive weapons that i've wielded so as
you think about optimizing and the
reason for me is energy production right
just breaking things down to atp the
ability to generate at a cellular level
the energy that i need to do something
is critically important um
as you begin to think about the role
that diet and exercise play like so
going back to wanting this to be super
prescriptive for somebody right now is
taking notes and like i'm going to live
an awesome life and so here are the
things okay fulfillment we understand
that the money isn't going to be the
thing
how do how should they begin to think
about
optimizing at a physical level
so at a physical level um you know you
still need to be present in the moment
and you still need to have you know
strong cognition you need to be
you know have your thoughts about you
you need to have the energy as you
described to get throughout the day
you certainly don't want to lose down
time to being sick or feeling just you
know crappy because of uh you know a bad
diet or a bad night's sleep so i think
that
a lot of entrepreneurs now recognizing
that this health
element of of entrepreneurship is a key
component and it's not just some side
thought that you have uh you know after
the fact uh i did a
um i did a podcast with a
entrepreneurial coach yesterday and you
know he spends two hours in the gym
every day and he's focusing on his diet
and that's part of his his thing and i
said look it might be two hours a little
bit too much uh and you may be you know
over overdoing that there's a critical
mass necessary to achieve good health
but absolutely
um you know my my focus throughout my
entire career has been on
my health and my my ability to be
present whether it's for my family
whether it's for my employees whether
it's just to be present at the desk on
the job
uh and and this
comes back to
a basic prescription
uh you know of diet and exercise which
everybody sort of knows you know kind of
intellectually i i need to eat better
and i need to work out a little bit more
so the focus of my efforts over the last
25 30 years have been how do i really
tap into
optimizing uh all aspects of my health
and for me in the last even in the last
two years
my shift has come down to this concept
of what i call metabolic flexibility so
you know i was i was a high carb athlete
high performance athlete in the 70s and
80s and part of the 90s then i sort of
got my my act together and i was uh i
created the primal blueprint which
looked at just natural foods
and and getting rid of the sugars and
pies and cakes and candies and then i
was a keto athlete which is even the
highest level of that where you you get
rid of a lot of carbs and you really
train your body to become good at
burning fat but what i realized about a
couple years ago
is that really what we're all after in
terms of the like holy grail of health
is this concept of metabolic flexibility
it's this metabolic health that allows
you to extract energy from any substrate
that's available uh in your body at any
one time whether it's the fat on your in
your in your fat stores you know on your
thighs your hips your belly whether it's
the fat on your plate of food the
carbohydrate on your plate of food the
glucose in your bloodstream the glycogen
in your muscles the ketones that your
liver makes and the absence of glucose
and all of these different
energy substrates
are available and we are
wired to take to take advantage of them
but we have to train our bodies to do
that and so many of us have become
carbohydrate dependent over the years
that we've lost this ability to become
metabolically flexible and metabolically
efficient and we're going to give people
the recipe on how to do that um
restriction of carbs some restriction of
protein i would imagine um reasonable
amounts of healthy fats time restricted
feeding like what are the what are the
key there you go there you you said what
i was going to say no it's basically
those are the elements and the the other
is the recognition that
um you don't need as many calories as
you thought you needed to thrive all
right so
why why do people get the belief is
because i i will say it's probably
driven by what you're taught breakfast
is most important meal that kind of
[__] but then it's also at a
physiological level
people have eaten so
ridiculously their entire lives they
actually have the cravings they wake up
and they're hungry as hell um so how do
you
is it just that is there more than that
how do you see people getting better
well you get beyond that first of all by
retraining you know by building the
metabolic machinery to be really good at
burning fat by increasing the number of
mitochondria by increasing the
efficiency and effectiveness of those
mitochondria where the fat burns can you
do that just your diet or do you have to
bust ass in the gym you can do it just
through diet now it helps to do it in
the gym but i would say 80 to 90 percent
of all you're going to achieve
in that realm of of sort of
reconfiguring your energy production
comes from your dietary choices and not
just by the way
um you know macronutrients how much fat
protein carbohydrate but how much of
each of those you eat at a given meal
how how often you spend not eating
anything for long periods of time which
then refines that mechanism yeah you got
to go to the gym mostly to maintain
muscle mass and to maintain strength and
mobility and you know those other
aspects of health
that kind of define
a healthy lifestyle and an awesome
lifestyle that ability to move through
life and enjoy
movement and access to places and people
uh without being in pain and without
being uh you know bedridden or in a
wheelchair but but yeah 80 to 90 of this
do you know what's going on at a
cellular level that makes because i if
if anybody's ever said that to me before
i don't remember it i've never
i don't have any memory of anybody
saying that through diet you can
actually increase the number of
mitochondria um
what changes specifically in in sort of
that quick list that we went down or if
there's something else what is it that's
triggering that and if you know the
cellular mechanism what is it
so first of all let's let's just be
clear that you said do i have to spend
you know hours in the gym grunting and
groaning and and sweating and straining
you still have to move right you still
have to go about your life
um moving throughout the day that's one
of the sort of main
focuses if you will of of this uh
awesome lifestyle but it does not mean
you have to grind it out in the gym uh
to you know to get
80 or 90 of the results but what's
happening is
um you know your body is
always requiring energy and if you
continue to eat
every couple of hours throughout the day
and
much of that is in the form of
carbohydrate even if it's complex
carbohydrate even if it's you know
healthy
you know whole grain whatever
breads or things like that your body is
still becoming dependent
uh on this glucose supply and it's
basically telling you're telling it
through your choices there's when we're
never really gonna have to tap into our
fat supplies we're not gonna have to go
any any period of time and and and use
the reserve fuel that we've been
building up over the years because
you
choose to continue to eat whether it's
your learned behavior because you were
told that breakfast was the most
important meal of the day and you got to
eat three square meals and going back to
the 80s and 90s you know if you go more
than three or four hours without eating
you'll go into cannibal mode and you'll
cannibalize your muscle tissue these are
all things by the way this was like
acknowledged in the science community
um you know by those who didn't know any
better for the longest time well
it turns out that that you know
carbohydrates and glucose which is what
carbohydrates turn into
uh is not the preferred fuel of the body
the body prefers to burn fat loves to
burn fat would like to burn ketones to
fuel the brain
uh but we just kind of never give it the
chance because of access to food and
again the three square meals a day so in
order to um effect a change in the body
you gotta kind of trick somebody in some
regards because you know we're we're an
organism that evolved over millions
hundreds of millions of years
uh to conserve energy so conserving
energy for this body means i don't want
to i don't want to build any structures
that
i don't need that are unnecessary
i don't want to waste any energy doing
stuff that is going to um you know not
help me survive and so
uh if you
are presented with uh copious amounts of
food all the time the body says
basically i don't need to tap into the
store and body fats that's like that's
for that's for later that's my reserve
that's my that's my ira account for the
body right i don't want to tap into that
there'll be great penalties for doing
that that's what the body thinks because
you're giving it food all the time
so how to trick the body into doing this
is you say well
i'm going to skip a meal here or there
i'm going to cut back on carbs i'm going
to tell the brain there's not going to
be a lot of glucose for the next couple
of days
and we're going to have to take
advantage of all of the instructions
that are in our dna
that provide for this plan b in the
event of a lack of food so you
consciously choose not to eat carbs you
consciously choose to skip meals once in
a while and by the way you don't do this
like again struggling and suffering i
have i've spent decades teaching people
how to do this in a way that's easy and
graceful but you basically retrain the
body to go well if there's not going to
be that much glucose we're going to have
to build a metabolic machinery to burn
fat more efficiently and that's this
mitochondrial biogenesis
so the lack of glucose the lack of
carbohydrates
the the in at times the the timed eating
window where you go 18 or 20 hours
without eating these are all signals
that our bodies you know that the genes
within our body um use to say okay we
gotta build more protein we gotta build
more uh enzymes that take fats out of
storage we have to we have to make the
mitochondria more efficient and within a
very like relatively short period of
time like three weeks of doing this you
can reconfigure your body so that it
becomes
very adept at burning fat very
comfortable burning fat for all of your
motor activities throughout the day
your brain becomes very adept at using
ketones for fuel instead of glucose and
so in the absence of carbohydrate in the
absence of glucose
you start to develop this metabolic
flexibility now keto has been like the
big
like tool in the toolbox to get there
right but you can do it
uh without going full keto you can do it
with a with a much more
aggressive time restriction uh again the
body if you go 20 hours without eating
there are a lot of adaptations that the
body will make recognizing that
um and by the way the body isn't like
this is not new information the body
this is how humans lived for millions of
years you know you got
you got one meal once in a while
you are wired to overeat
at that meal because first of all you
couldn't save it you couldn't
refrigerate the leftovers right you
couldn't uh
there so so we were wired to overeat and
then we had this
marvelous mechanism in our body that
takes the extra calories and converts it
to fuel that we carry around with us
conveniently located right above the
center of gravity on our ass and our in
our in our hips and our stomach and our
thighs
and it's it's such an elegant design the
problem is
most of us retained this ability to
store the extra calories because they're
available all the time but we never
developed the skill
to burn off those extra calories
metabolically one thing that was a huge
breakthrough for me um and i think it
behooves people to really think about
why you and obviously a lot of other
people use the term metabolic
flexibility is your
your body is now able to use different
things for fuel so it's got it can use
the sugar that you're intaking the
glucose it can use the fat you have
stored in your body the big breakthrough
for me was asking the question why the
hell do we store
fat like what what is the purpose of
that and when you were saying you can't
store the food if you find it you
actually can right you're storing the
energy potential in your way you're
storing it as fat in your body so if you
think of the fat on your body as sort of
a refrigerator that's keeping that that
potential energy safe and in your body
with you whenever the need might arise
and i remember one day thinking oh my
god in in western society for sure you
have some people they could be in their
30s or 40s and never once have needed to
click over into actually burning their
body fat they are constantly feeding
themselves and the the metabolic
machinery doesn't exist the potential
for it is there and they could still
trigger those genes and kick it into use
and i thought oh my god like the thought
that i'm carrying fat with me now that i
may have stored when i was a kid because
i've never put myself into that kind of
deficit to trigger that machinery to
kick in to pull the fat out of
the the cells and use it for energy i
was like whoa this is how people really
get into trouble and so having that
ability to
if you miss a meal or whatever fine you
just click over into grabbing the fat is
is profoundly transformative
it is and and in many ways i mean it's
certainly going to
make you trend toward your ideal body
composition as you as you burn more body
fat but as you become so adept at
deriving energy from restored body fat
and using ketones
one of the one of the biggest benefits
of all is hunger appetite and cravings
dissipate because get get the fact that
now your body is so good at burning fat
it doesn't care it doesn't even know
you know your muscles don't even know
whether the fat that they're burning
right now came off the plate of food you
just ate or off of your butt or thighs
it doesn't care it doesn't know because
that skill is is so good and so over
time
the the the panic sensation that the
brain used to have of
holy crap it's 1 30 and i haven't had
lunch yet i'm going to die or i'm gonna
get angry or i'm gonna you know i'm
gonna gnaw someone's head off that that
goes away and in its place you get this
steady state of regular energy
throughout the day which again fat is
fueling most of the muscular activity
and ketones are fueling a lot of the
brain activity and and people get a
little bit you know they a little
freaked out when they hear the term
ketones and they hear about ketosis and
it sounds like a disease and you know
ketoacidosis ketones are just this
amazing super fuel
it's like a superpower that everybody
has and we don't
most of us never get a chance to tap
into it as you said earlier it's it's
there it's available it's in the
blueprint uh we can use it if called
upon
and to demystify what ketones are it's
basically a byproduct of fat metabolism
right you're pulling the fat out of the
cells turn it into a ketone and then
send it to the liver it gets turned into
a ketone the brain can use it and and
one of the things that i find like
really fascinating is um the liver has
the capacity to make 750 calories
worth of fuel out of ketones every day
and uh the brain you know you will hear
people say well the brain uses you know
20 of the body's calories well
um if you're you know if you're
consuming 2500 calories a day 20 of that
is is 500 calories that's about right um
and that's that's a glucose thing so we
have more than enough
of the calories from ketones to fuel the
brain but really the the exciting part
to me
is this notion that once you become
metabolically flexible
uh and you've used maybe a ketogenic
diet to just manipulate for a couple of
weeks to get there uh you don't have to
stay you know keto for the rest of your
life you just use it as a as a strategy
to develop this flexibility
one of the things you recognize is that
the um
uh you know if you go to the gym and you
do like a heavy leg day right and you're
gonna you're doing lots of massive
squats and dead lifts and things like
that
your body's your leg muscles and the
major muscles in your legs are going to
use 30 or 40 or 50 times as much fuel
to get that work done as they would at
rest meanwhile
how much fuel is the brain using just
about the same amount as it was before
so the the fuel demands of the brain do
not vary wildly throughout the day it's
just a steady steady state and so
interesting i'd be i'd be curious to
know if if that's true
well so what's making me um hit the
pause button there is they
were looking at the um caloric
requirements of a grand chess master in
the middle of a chess tournament is
something like 6 6 500 calories a day
which is
insane so i'd be curious to see like if
having a steady state of caloric
consumption by the brain is actually not
ideal have you looked at anything that
sort of looks at um
cognitive load and its impact
yeah i mean i
i would love to see that study because
that just you know you're you're talking
about michael phelps type calories to
fuel is said but what it amounts to is a
sedentary albeit cerebral
uh you know contest
um no the brain the brain's usage of
calories throughout the day does not
vary wildly
and in the event that um you know you've
got a
uh a chess master who's you know doing
multiple uh games you i suppose you
could argue that if you're sipping on a
coca-cola all day you know and and
wandering around and and nervous and
building up all of this uh you know pent
up energy so you're calling [__] on
yeah
here here's the good news
i could definitely uh it could be a
[__] study who knows whatever um i'm
super curious to look into that so yeah
all right so your [__] meter goes
off on that one off the yeah
just think about that if that were the
case where would
where would those 6500 calories come
from because the brain doesn't burn
protein and it doesn't burn fat it burns
glucose and ketones full stop
so like i said you're you're either
gonna have to down like you know uh a
case of coca-cola to get that amount of
glucose
um you know and if the limitations of
the of the liver are seven only i say
only in a you know a joking way only 750
calories a day yeah
so so we'll uh tom we'll we'll handle
this offline okay so but in the meantime
my point is that that the liver gets
um comfortable making ketones at a
steady state so in the early stages of
going into ketosis or the early stages
of uh
of of
a long fast for instance
the liver tends to over produce ketones
and those
spill out into the bloodstream and into
the breath and into the urine and you
would see those as a as high numbers on
a ketone meter on a ketone strip
uh and you'd go oh i'm in ketosis
because uh the definition of ketosis is
you know 0.5 millimolar or greater
and some people show 3
five millimolar
and they say hey i'm in ketosis it's
working i'm doing great
but in terms of metabolic flexibility
that's not great because that's the body
wasting energy like i said doesn't want
to waste energy
and over time the body gets used to
the the demands the workload required of
it
and so the liver starts to just kind of
trickle out these ketones in a way
that's much more conservative and still
able to feed the brain fully uh and and
that's the metabolic efficiency in
addition the metabolic flexibility that
i talk about and
you know why is that good well over time
you realize that jesus i didn't need to
eat three meals a day that's just way
too much food um and the meals that i do
eat tend not to be
as big as they were before and the good
news is i'm not even hungry i mean i'm
hungry look i love as i said every bite
of food i eat i enjoy and i savor but i
also
with that comes another benefit that not
many people appreciate and that is
now you know when it's time to put the
goddamn fork down and say that's enough
you know it's it's the so now the
difference between being satiated and
gluttonous it becomes a very uh
well-defined boundary for most people
now let's talk about the quality of the
calories one thing so first of all i
love your
weekly link love for anybody that's not
following mark's daily apple get after
it
that that's one of my favorite things
that you put out and
going through recently you were talking
about you were talking about in an older
population but i'd be curious to see if
you think this applies everywhere that
animal protein is superior to plant
protein for older people um one why is
that true for older people and then does
it apply downstream as you're younger
uh so yeah it's it it applies across the
board it just applies more as you get
older because as you get older it's more
difficult to
to assimilate and to get that amount of
protein in so is it the amino acid
profile like what is it about it's it's
the amino acid profile right so
um you know
it sounds simplistic to say like for
like but if you want to build muscle you
should probably eat muscle protein if
you want to build collagen you should
probably consume more collagen
you know this is how the body
similarities among mammals so so we
consume meat we consume mammal mammalian
meat or even fish it's it's fairly
similar in amino acid profile to human
muscle tissue so that's one of the
reasons it makes it an ideal uh source
of animal protein is an ideal source of
protein now can you come close to it
with
some sort of a
uh you know a plant-based concoction
where you're mixing pea protein and
and beans and rice and
i mean yes but some of the major
um some of the some of the major amino
acids that are present in meat are not
just you don't find them in any
appreciable quantities can you give me a
breakdown on amino acids so one thing
that i've always heard is that the amino
acid profile in plants just is inferior
to the amino acid profile in um meats
but honestly i i have never pressed hard
enough to really figure out like what
are amino acids doing
exactly like what's their role
well they're the building blocks of
protein and so a lot of protein
most of the human body is protein when
your genes
are taking the information and prompting
the construction of certain
uh structures and enzymes in the body uh
almost invariably they're using amino
acids to build these these structures so
some of the structures
don't require
you know a full array of amino acids we
have this group of of essential amino
acids that we must get
outside of the diet
the non-essential amino acids the body
can kind of manufacture
uh on its own in the absence of of a
dietary supply of them but of the eight
amino acids that we must have uh there
that's why we need to to consume
um you know quality sources of protein
so the amino acids in different proteins
use different
amounts of different amino acids
so
you know
arginine ornithine tryptophan
these are these are all amino acids that
you know muscles
require uh higher amounts of and if you
don't
if you don't get a full complement of
them you're sort of rate limited by uh
whatever the least prevalent of those
ones required was
hence this this notion that you can
uh you know by eating animal protein
uh you're going to do yourself the the
best possible favor in being able to
build muscle protein lean body mass and
and repair some of the tissues
and just really fast just to continue
down that path so you've got is there a
mechanism in the body where they
essentially know okay these are the
different tissues and i guess i'm
rounding it to tissues these are the
different tissues that we need to repair
create build whatever and we know what
the amino acid profile of each of those
tissues is so if the
diet coming in does not match the amino
acid profiles of the things that we need
to address then we just have to go well
i guess we can't deal with whatever
maybe it's connective tissue or we can't
deal with muscle tissue at least not as
much as we want
no that's exactly right so i'll give you
another example um recently
um
bone broth has come on the market right
it's come on the scene and collagen
collagen supplementation um i uh had my
first really uh bad experience with that
good experience with that um about six
years ago i was i play ultimate frisbee
and i and i played
what exactly i'm sorry well so so
um i after years of playing ultimate
frisbee i was and i'm you know i was in
already in my late 50s early 60s i was
developing achilles tendinosis so
thickening of my achilles
um i wasn't able to tissue essentially
like scar tissue essentially and i went
to a doctor and the doctor said well
like one of the best you know orthopedic
guys in los angeles and he said well
there's only one
one fix for that and that is we gotta
take you in and we gotta slit open the
back of your heels and scrape your
achilles down and pack you in a cast for
three months and then do nine months of
rehab and you'll be back to 80 85
percent and i'm like [__] that i i'm you
know i went back to the drawing board
and i and i i i literally smh man i'm
like uh
wow i i realize that the achilles
uh is uh you know a collagenous material
throughout the body it's it's it's
largely based on collagen peptides um i
haven't been getting any i haven't been
eating animals nose to tail which
everyone in human history did until 200
years ago uh and so for the last again
for for millennia humans have taken in
the raw material to rebuild
tendons ligaments connective tissue
fascia cartilage all this
uh all this cartilage based
uh protein in the human body and in the
absence of that raw material the body
goes well you know you're not giving me
what i need to repair the damage that
you did when you went out and sprinted
and played ultimate frisbee and so i'm
gonna i'm gonna go to plan b which is
i'm gonna build some scar tissue and i'm
gonna put down a layer of protection
because we can't build it back the way
it was so i recognized this and i
started consuming
30 40 grams of collagen a day and i
actually undo the scarring it completely
cured
what was an otherwise untenable
situation within four months i was
completely cured and knocked with today
my achilles both are probably my strong
part of the strongest you know they're
certainly not the weakest link let's put
it that way
did you get an mri or something that
showed the thickening oh yeah oh yeah so
and you had it it was visibly thick to
the and you know i couldn't like like if
i got a massage i would not let the
massage therapist go anywhere near my
achilles even just
mildly touching them would illicit pain
i was to the point where if i was you
know gonna jump off the last stair in a
stairwell i would think i was going to
snap both both achilles it was it was
horrible so
the point is i i think what we're seeing
now in
in sports across the board uh is a
generation of athletes
who
don't eat nose to tail they eat the
choice cuts of meat but they don't eat
any collagen um
at the very least when they were growing
up they had jello jello was a source of
of these collagen peptides
but now with all of the you know
associations with jello and sugar and
sweeteners and
cosby uh you know jello kind of fell off
the
fell off the uh the radar and so we've
we've got a generation of athletes that
haven't been
feeding themselves the raw materials
they need to repair mcl's acls uh you
know meniscus cartilage fascia
um and and tendons and ligaments and
it's and it's showing up in these
athletic injuries now one thing i've
heard you talk about in terms of getting
the collagen into the system which i've
never heard anybody else speak to and i
found this really interesting
so there's very little blood flow or so
they say and it seems to be bearing out
in the research but there's very little
blood flow to tendons and other parts of
connective tissue
so why do you take collagen before a
hard workout so it's
there's just one really cool study done
uh
four years ago five years ago now uh
they labeled collagen peptides in a
drink it was actually a gelatin drink
gelatin collagen are sort of similar
and uh and they did 15 grams i think 20
minutes before a six minute jump
rope workout and they literally measure
the uptake of these labeled collagen
peptides into the achilles and it was
like more than like double the uptake
uh versus the control group when when
they
um you know they drank the collagen
before the workout and and the theory is
that because there's no blood supply and
yet this is a uh
the achilles tendon is a tendon like
like most of them while it does have a
blood supply it's got it's got water
sort of in it it's got fluids in it and
as you squeeze it the fluids come out
and as you relax it the fluids come back
in and it was almost by sort of this
like massaging type thing that the the
peptides had access to the interior of
the matrix of uh of the tendon so that's
that's really interesting for another
reason as well which is when you get
injured people tend to lay off it right
to not use it and that can actually end
up creating its own source of problems
which sort of putting that logic
together now that makes sense if you're
not using it you're not getting that
sort of um
spongy effect yeah yeah you know opening
it up to let things in that's
interesting no it's interesting i mean
again to further that that notion um
physical therapy over the past decade
has changed a lot you know it used to be
uh you know rest ice compression
elevation right right and and now it
turns out ice may not be you know
beneficial to most people because
they're talking about inflammation yeah
yeah other than maybe the first 10 or 15
minutes if it's if there's massive
swelling
and i've never responded well to ice for
instance i've always responded much
better with any sort of an itis or an
injury a tendonitis
to warmth to heat
and the other concept was using it as
soon as you can right up to the point of
pain so now
people have uh you know knee
replacements and hip replacements and
they're like they got to be up and
walking the day they get the the thing
done
uh so it's it's uh i you know my mother
um you know who passed away a year ago
but she she had a serious lung cancer
issue probably six you know six years
prior to that
uh and she had her a lung removed and a
breast removed with cancer and they had
her literally as soon as she woke up
they had her
walking around
you know with with her iv stand so the
the whole the idea of recovery now has
shifted from bed rest to
literally do whatever you can as much as
you can up to the point of pain
to keep that body in motion and to
prompt those healing mechanisms uh to
kick in
yeah that's interesting to me when you
think about the body as having the
things that you already need i mean this
goes back to metabolic flexibility right
you have all of these abilities already
in you and it's about turning those on
flipping the the genetic switches or
however you want to think of it um to
jump starting that that's really
interesting really interesting and you
know when it comes down to injury laying
off the body you're giving the body the
signal that hey i guess we don't need
this anymore and so you begin that
process of atrophy um which is the exact
opposite of what you want to do which is
tell the body no no there's still
demands in this you're going to need to
address it you're going to need and then
if you've got something like connective
tissue where you need that that squeeze
the tightening and the release
to actually get the nutrients into it
and then of course it's all started
talking about
animal protein versus plant protein make
sure that you have the amino acid
profiles that you need for the body to
actually utilize those
and and i want to actually go back to
the animal versus plant protein for a
second so
was it eight essential amino acids or
eight total amino acids
um eight essential amino acids so these
are the ones there's 20 20 22 some
people say 21 but 22 of amino acids that
the body uses and and eight of them are
essential you have to get them from the
diet okay and can we get all 20 like if
we're hardcore about you know creating
just the ultimate plant-based diet can
we get all 22 or are is there actually
some sure but you you're going to have
to supplement
like crazy you know you're going to have
to go down to your i specifically mean
without supplementation no
uh it's you can but you don't again you
don't get the amounts you don't get the
ratios and the amounts and so you're
sort of you have this sort of rate
limiting effect uh you can and how how
some people overcome it like some of the
uh plant-based bodybuilders for instance
who by the way got most of their size
while they were eating meat and then
decided they wanted to go plant-based
because someone convinced them that that
was the right thing to do they just eat
a lot they just you know overeat like
you know you might get 300 total grams
of protein in a day
of which you know only probably 75
or 80 grams is maybe useful for repair
and
building i'm actually pitching a
reality show around called carnivore
versus vegan because look i i don't care
what the reality is i just want to know
what the truth is and so what i want to
do is lock identical twins uh in a house
separated so you have one identical twin
is going to be a carnivore one identical
twin is going to be a vegan and then you
put them through a battery of different
things from
uh strength tests conditioning just
general you know like you talk about in
your book how do you feel are you hungry
are you um agitated like where are we at
and then see like what what ends up
happening to those identical twins it
would be utterly fascinating and it's so
controversial
what do you think is the the um the real
amount of time really that long
absolutely and i'll tell you why um i
mean it's not that long to start to you
know parse out or tease out some
small
discrepancies in attitude or you know
sleep behavior or things like that
um but but here's the the good news is
the human body is wickedly resilient i
mean look we survived
horrendous conditions for millions of
years we happen to be pretty lucky in in
our access to food and clothing and
shelter and warmth and all the things we
want right now but we're really
resilient and so you know you go back to
the irish potato famine when people
lived on seaweed and shoe leather for
six months at a time
you know until they could get some
actual source of calories into them the
body is is very resilient and and the
good news in that regard is that if you
are someone who decides
i've eaten animals my whole life i want
to switch to a plant-based diet you
might get a good six
year run until
stuff starts happening
and some people you know i'm not going
to say everybody you know
is gonna
suffer from a from a vegan diet but if
you're really going to go vegan
it's a full-time job to get that right
and
i see now on the internet on you know
you see a lot of these plant former
plant-based bodybuilders who go back to
consuming meat because they're like okay
i just
you know i got a nice run i was i got
some some leeway i got some runway if
you will
for a year or two before i started to
notice
that i was not as strong or that you
know things were starting to fall apart
and that's again the resilience of a
body that spent 20 years or 25 or 30
years building itself up to peak
performance or a peak level or peak size
at the age of 25 or 30
using animal products to get there and
then kind of as they say coasting on a
on a plant-based diet for a while so
your experiment while it would be
interesting would probably take a year
to kind of manifest itself in in in
obvious changes if at all i mean i'm not
suggesting that it would that that's the
way it would be
but
you know it's a it's a it's a certainly
a good thought experiment yeah i mean
this is the kind of thing that um it it
part of why i want to do it is is
there's a religious element to it um
that i find very unusual so it's like
there's there's an answer out there
somewhere and look i get it from a
sustainability standpoint um you know we
probably need to think about farming
just entirely differently uh certainly
from an animal standpoint um i know you
one of the links that you posted was
about that then you know the potential
advantages of smaller farms getting room
in animals that kind of thing
and you know look i am not saying that
the way things are now is in any way
shape or form ideal i'm just saying
there is an answer like this is an
empirical question um and and so there
is a breakdown but human metabolism is
so [__] complicated and this is why i
wanted to have identical twins because
of course different people react to
different things so it's like you know
finding people that are genetically
identical uh and then running them
through it's interesting you're really
[__] me up though with the year thing
uh that is going to be wildly probably
what would you think it was going to
happen in six weeks um not six weeks but
honestly i thought we would get
really interesting data at three months
and i thought it would be very
compelling at six months um i never i
originally pitched it at six months
people pushed back pretty immediately
and i said okay we could probably still
make this really interesting at three
months um but
there does need to be some element of
real to it otherwise it's just people
arguing yeah yeah no exactly um and i
would say that you know um
your your idea that there's an answer
here that there there is not an answer
i'll just tell you that right now
there's no answer there's no right
answer in in in diet
would you define right answer then
um
the one way that works better than all
other ways right do you think if we had
a super computer that could run at down
to every single cell as being tracked
that there would be an answer and this
is just a limitation of human and
computer computation as of today or
there really is for some reason no way
to figure this out no i'd say there's no
way to figure this out we're complex
biological organisms and while we have
you know similar
uh processes that happen within each of
us you know we all burn fat the same way
we all build muscle the same way we all
uh you know sequester
uh um pathogens the same way we all deal
with with uh you know immune issues the
same way it's the degree to which we do
that that varies among us and so
with that notion that that there are
varying degrees of potential outcomes
here
um one of the things we would have to
ask ourselves is uh because you and
again as a complex biological system
um does optimum include
um satiation fulfillment uh tastes
better in pleasure centers
uh you know or are we just going to be
relegated to drinking
uh um soylent you know and and saying
i'm hoping
two different answers right so here's
one for the most hardcore [__]
on the planet and this is optimized for
let's say longevity which would be my
sort of thing and then there's here's
the mark sisson you're gonna love every
bite that you ever take but it's also
you know good for
some amount of longevity high
performance that kind of thing right and
and maybe even possibly not optimal
um
you know i i still drink uh red wine i
love red wine you know ethanol is toxic
to the human body although everything
studies
still on the dry the dry water dry farm
dry farm wines yup yup
love that stuff um you're gonna say
every study you read
probably something positive about red
wine yes says something positive about
red wine i'm like i'm looking for the
one that says stop
um
one of your links was low-dose alcohol
seems to be beneficial to mice
yes what
yeah now is that a hermesis thing or is
it something if not if it's not it's not
hermetic if it's a daily thing right if
it's a daily thing it's not hermetic
hormesis almost by definition of the is
the short you know pulse of a
potentially
um you know acute uh
insult if you will to to the human body
that results in a positive
uh outcome a positive adaptation if you
will
um so uh yeah but you know so the idea
see
this is
this is the the generational difference
between the two of us tom so so like you
know you're looking for the hacks like
what's the ideal how do i live the
longest and how do i live uh you know
and how do i optimize that and and i
have to take
everything together and i say well first
of all i don't care if i live forever i
don't want to live here i don't need to
live forever because what i'm of that
mindset
that
what defines my enjoyment of life right
now is partly offset by the knowledge
that it ain't going to be there one day
so um i'm trying to you know meet out
the um the pleasure over a finite period
of time um again i talk about like if
there's if somebody said look you gotta
eat this mark it tastes like [__] but
you're going to live five years longer
and you're gonna have to eat it twice a
day i'm like i'm out i don't need i
don't need to um to sacrifice
the sort of short-term hedonistic
experience
uh that i crave you know whether it's a
serotonin or dopamine it's just i want
i'm looking for that and if you tell me
that it's been proven by science it's
going to help me live five years longer
i'm probably
going to reconsider
whether you know it's worth
the sacrifice of the of the immediate
experience because
you know as you get as we get down to
this we can talk about what happens in
20 or 50 years from now but right now
all that matters is is this moment i'm
hanging out with with tom billy we're
having a great conversation that's all
that matters to me right now uh and i
want to i want to be in that moment
as often as i can
um and it takes it takes work uh for it
for as long as i can
and not have to make a sacrifice of
whatever today's experience or now's
experience is because somebody did some
research that said you know
if you do
it differently and and you sacrifice
significantly
you'll live longer i'm like well okay
quality of life has to factor into the
equation
uh you know you can't just tell me i'm
gonna live forever and then say but your
life's gonna suck and you and you're
gonna some you know whatever right so
now i totally get it tom i'm rambling on
here sorry about that not at all that
that's super interesting to me i love
that people come at this stuff from
different angles um so
to that point so you have a very
specific way of looking at the world and
you just laid it out for us if you could
only have five ingredients not uh five
meals but five ingredients so it could
be uh filet mignon it could be asparagus
what are the five things that that you
would want if that was all you could eat
for the rest of time and you wanted the
the kind of life you have now so it's
delicious but it's also you know
cognitively it's great
on and on no what's interesting is
because um
typically people ask me what like what
are some of the things that you wish you
could eat every day
but you can't and to me it's peanuts and
beer like i could live the rest of my
life on peanuts and beer but amazing i
can't eat i can't i can't eat peanuts
because they're horrible for me and you
know i i i still like beer but i i'm
limited to like a half a glass once in a
while
um no i mean my my my favorite food of
all is lamb so you know a lamb chop
would be one
um i'd probably pick if i had to pick a
vegetable
you know broccoli is probably my
favorite vegetable
if i had to pick um some sort of a
starchy tuber uh don't don't think i'm
weird but um
like either turnips or rutabagas with
butter i did not see that coming no
nobody does um i like to i like the real
bitter aspect of that um but i'm sort of
picking one from from each of these
categories right like a fruit
if i had to pick a fruit it would be um
like bing cherries i think are probably
you know one of my favorite fruits
um and uh
you know and
red wine and and i could live the rest
of my life on those on those five things
word
those are some fantastic choices respect
um so we talked about this the last time
we met i was i did a rabbit starvation
diet which was basically 85 or more
percent of my calories came from protein
took my fat as low as i could my
carbohydrates were essentially zero my
doctor love me was telling me i was
going to live forever but i felt like
[__] yeah and when you talk about steer
by how you feel and not you know worry
so much about all the things you can
measure um that seems wow there's a
great way to get more into measurement
than you uh feeling certainly trumps
everything and one last thing i have to
ask you about this so thinking of of how
you feel so um i almost never drink but
my anniversary was this uh in fact it
was yesterday um but on the friday
before my wife and i had some drinks to
celebrate and i mix it with monster
which is uh it's a no calorie drink but
it's of course pickling me from the
inside there's no question but going to
how you feel
so i i follow a very certain regiment
when i drink i drink very early so i can
sober up and have many many hours
probably eight hours before i go to bed
um and i'm i'm hydrating like crazy uh
100 i i don't [__] with night drinking
that to me is a total mistake okay
because you're gonna you're gonna be
hungover and i don't play with hangovers
so but when i have it with monster dude
i feel like a million bucks so when when
i sober up i don't get any fatigue i
don't feel tired whatsoever and normally
i'm getting so tired like on a normal
day no drinking nothing just my normal
day by 8 30 i'm like i'm ready for bed
and by nine it's lights out and this was
i i didn't feel jittery nothing i felt
so good at midnight i didn't want to go
to bed and i was like
what is it so why didn't you do it the
next day and the next day and the next
day well so now i'll answer that
question so there is in terms of um
fatigue it was amazing but it made my
joints hurt so my hands ached uh my
knees started to hurt and so from a it's
clearly pro-inflammatory so i'm the
alcohol's pro-inflammatory the monster
though keeps me awake so i'm super
curious i would love to isolate like do
i and you probably just hate
energy drinks so much you're not sure
what's in them and neither am i quite
frankly but i'm wondering if there's a
supplement or something a b12 vitamin i
don't know that would give me that same
level of like
no energy drop uh
you know as i get later into the evening
um
just the the crystal clear focus like
when when i speak on stage about 45
minutes before i go on stage i'll have a
monster because it makes me so sharp
no i mean i suggest i mean taurian is is
typically one of the ingredients
theratory and a little bit of caffeine
but um no i mean i like if i'm speaking
on stage i'll have a ketone supplement
i'll have a beta-hydroxybutyrate because
i know what it's going to you know it's
going to have a short-term immediate
impact on on my brain on cognition
uh on being present on being in the
moment so yeah there's a there's an
explanation there's a reason uh that
that works on the other hand that might
be more again of that hormetic effect
that you can do it once or twice once in
a while but if you did it on a regular
basis
uh it would catch up to you i mean it's
you know the examples are people who
used to to use um ephedra to work out in
the gym right and they just felt amped
in the gym and they could do an extra
couple of reps on everything they did
but over time ephedra is an adrenal
uh you know it just fries your adrenals
so in the short term you get a mild
benefit and a pump and but but you can't
you can't incorporate it into a regular
routine
got it mark i always enjoy time with you
and whether it's actually getting
something like this where we're you know
sort of face to face or it's just
engaging with your content dude it's
amazing um if you would tell people
about your school it sounds absolutely
astonishing
well so i have a the primal health coach
institute it's an online learning
experience very robust we certified
people to become health coaches
i think if there were ever a time in
this world where health coaches were
necessary it is right now
especially if we're talking about the
concept of of immunity and shoring up
your immune system
um so just google primal health coach
institute or primal health coach uh it's
um you know i think we put like 5 000
people through the program but by now in
addition to deep deep deep learning and
a real deep dive into the science behind
all of the stuff that i've talked about
for 20 years
we have some build business building
modules if you want to build a practice
or build a coaching
practice uh and um very in-depth on how
to coach how to work one-on-one with
people so it's uh i'm very proud of this
it's been years you know putting it
together and uh so that's kind of the
the focus i have now
amazing man well thank you so much for
joining me today dude i i could do this
for hours and hours but i'm super
grateful for the time uh always a lot of
fun i look forward to when we can share
some physical space again likewise
thanks tom all right you got it all
right guys if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you